# Basic Syntax

This is where we'll go over a very basic overview of Python syntax. I've
included a very basic C++ and Python program. They both just greet a user with a
supplied name into a function. This gives us just enough code to be able to
point out some differences between the languages.

## Minor Notes

You might see some hidden folders like `.mypy_cache` or `.vscode`, and those are
generated by VSCode when running `Python` files. They can be deleted or ignored.

I've also included an identical file to `program.py` but with the optional
typing included if you were curious to see what it looks like. You can find that
in `program.py with types`.

## Grouping

C++ Groups things by braces, and separated with semicolons:

```cpp
{
    statement;

    if (condition) {
        inner statement;
        inner statement;
    }

    statement;
    statement;
}
```

Whereas Python groups things by indentation, and separated by newlines:

```python
statement

if condition:
    inner statement
    inner statement

statement
statement
```

## Comments

I used comments in a few places already, so just to be clear:
**C++:**

```cpp
// this is a comment

/*
this is a
multi-line comment!
*/
```

**Python:**

```python
# this is a comment

'''
this is a
multi-line comment!
'''
```

## Types

C++ is a `statically typed` language, which means that you can know what type
every variable has beforehand. You can know by looking at code beforehand what
type every variable and function has:

```cpp
int x = 5;

int square(int var) {
    return var * var;
}

cout << x << " squared is " << square(x) << endl;
```

But Python is dynamically typed, which means that you don't need to include type
names anywhere. This also means that variables can change types if they're
reassigned:

```python
x = 5  # x is an int for now

def square(var):  # no types listed anywhere!
    return float(var * var)  # cast result to float, just because

x = square(x)  # now x is a float!
```

Note that Python does support manual/optional typing, but this is more for
debugging and convenience, it's not mandatory at all.

## `main` and Running a Program

In `C++`, we run main through an `int main()` function.

In `Python`, we ask if the current file is being run by asking if it's name is
main (`if __name__ == "__main__"`). This is a result of how Python imports and
libraries work. That's not important for now; just keep in mind the syntax for
the time being.

Lastly, `C++` is compiled to run, so we need to run a compiler like `g++` to
turn the program code into something that we can run.

`Python` is **interpreted**, which means that it can run directly without being
compiled. In VSCode, just click on dropdown menu at the top:

`run > Run Without Debugging`

## Conclusion

`Python` is a lot shorter and simpler to write than `C++` generally, but it
introduces a bit of vagueness as a tradeoff. Types are not as important, and
you don't have to compile either. Once you get used to indentation and not
needing braces and semicolons, writing in `Python` is fairly natural.
